[RFC] Default field values (#3681)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-default-field-values.md

- Feature Name: `default_field_values`
- Start Date: 2024-08-22
- RFC PR:
- Rust Issue:

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow `struct` definitions to provide default values for individual fields and
thereby allowing those to be omitted from initializers. When deriving `Default`,
the provided values will then be used. For example:

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct Pet {
    name: Option<String>, // impl Default for Pet will use Default::default() for name

>     age: i128 = 42; // impl Default for Pet will use the literal 0 for age

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    age: i128 = 42, // impl Default for Pet will use the literal 0 for age
```

typo?

Author: yep, carried it over from a 4 year old typo 🤦

- Feature Name: `default_field_values`
- Start Date: 2024-08-22
- RFC PR:
- Rust Issue:

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow `struct` definitions to provide default values for individual fields and
thereby allowing those to be omitted from initializers. When deriving `Default`,
the provided values will then be used. For example:

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct Pet {
    name: Option<String>, // impl Default for Pet will use Default::default() for name
    age: i128 = 42, // impl Default for Pet will use the literal 42 for age
}
```

> These can then be used in the following way with the Functional Record Update syntax, with no value:

Reviewer: I think it's useful if the RFC draws parallel to the FRU syntax whenever possible, to avoid needing to re-explain things like how struct initializer expressions are type checked (especially bc going into the detail of how it actually works means this RFC is gonna get it wrong). But it's worthwhile calling this something different than FRU.

```rust
// Pet { name: Some(""), age: 42 }
let _ = Pet { name: Some(String::new()), .. }
// Compilation error: `name` needs to be specified
let _ = Pet { .. }
// Derived `Default` uses struct field defaults if present:
// Pet { name: None, age: 42 }
let _ = Pet::default();
// Pet { name: None, age: 42 }

> let _ = Pet { ..Pet::default() };

Author: Isn't there any value to state up-front that this hasn't changed for this case? But yeah, I'm ok with doing so: when writing `..val` the same current rules apply, only the `impl Default for Pet` expansion has changed.

```rust
// All fields are mandatory
struct Foo {
    alpha: &'static str,
    beta: bool,
    gamma: i32,
}
```

```rust
impl Foo {
    /// Constructs a `Foo`.
    fn new(alpha: &'static str, gamma: i32) -> Self {
        Self {
            alpha,
            beta: true,
            gamma
        }
    }
}
```

```rust
// A builder type that is able to construct a `Foo`, but that will fail at runtime if a field is
// missing.
#[derive(Default)]
struct FooBuilder {
    pub alpha: Option<&'static str>,
    pub beta: Option<bool>,
    pub gamma: Option<i32>,
}

impl FooBuilder {
    fn new() -> Self {
        FooBuilder::default()
    }
    fn set_alpha(&mut self, alpha: &'static str) -> &mut Self {
        self.alpha = Some(alpha);
        self
    }
    fn set_beta(&mut self, beta: &'static str) -> &mut Self {
        self.beta = Some(beta);
        self
    }
    fn set_gamma(&mut self, gamma: &'static str) -> &mut Self {
        self.gamma = Some(gamma);
        self
    }

    fn build(self) -> Foo {
        Foo {
            alpha: self.alpha.unwrap(),
            beta: self.beta.unwrap(),
            gamma: self.gamma.unwrap_or(0),
        }
    }
}
```

> ```rust

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth also comparing against derive macros like [typed-builder](https://github.com/idanarye/rust-typed-builder), which at least in my experience are a very common solution to this problem.

    fn build(self) -> Foo { // can only be called if all fields have been set
        Foo {
            alpha: self.alpha.unwrap(),
            beta: self.beta.unwrap(),
            gamma: self.gamma.unwrap_or(0), // This is an optional field with a default.
        }
    }
}

fn main() {
    let _ = FooBuilder::new()
        .set_alpha("")
        .set_beta(false) // If we comment this out, it will no longer compile.
        .set_gamma(42) // If we comment this out, it will still compile.
        .build();
}
```

All of the above can be represented with the exact same results with struct
field default values, but with much less boilerplate:

```rust
pub struct Foo {
    pub alpha: &'static str,
    pub beta: bool,
    pub gamma: i32 = 0,
}

fn main() {
    let _ = Foo {
        alpha: "",
        beta: false,
        ..
    };
}
```

The builder pattern is quite common in the Rust ecosystem, but as shown above its need is greatly
reduced with `struct` field defaults.

### `PhantomData` ergonomics

[nomicon]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/nomicon/phantom-data.html
[PhantomData]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/marker/struct.PhantomData.html

> Say that you want to define our own `Vec<T>` type. As the [nomicon] says,

Reviewer 2: The nomicon [no longer says this](https://github.com/rust-lang/nomicon/pull/363).

Because Rust currently does not have an in-language way to define default values,
you cannot `#[derive(Default)]` in the cases where you are not happy with the
natural default values that each field's type provides. By extending the syntax
of Rust such that default values can be provided, `#[derive(Default)]` can be
used in many more circumstances and thus boilerplate is further reduced.  The
addition of a single field, expands the code written by the `struct` author from
a single `derive` line to a whole `Default` `impl`, which becomes more verbose
linearly with the number of fields.

## Usage by other `#[derive(..)]` macros

[`serde`]: https://serde.rs/attributes.html

Custom derive macros exist that have a notion of or use default values.

### `serde`

For example, the [`serde`] crate provides a `#[serde(default)]` attribute that
can be used on `struct`s, and fields. This will use the field's or type's
`Default` implementations. This works well with field defaults; `serde` can
either continue to rely on `Default` implementations in which case this RFC
facilitates specification of field defaults; or it can directly use the default
values provided in the type definition.

> ### `structopt`

Reviewer 3: maybe replace with clap? since clap v3, basically all structopt stuff was integrated into clap and structopt is de-facto deprecated. https://docs.rs/structopt/0.3.26/structopt/index.html#maintenance

Reviewer 4: Yeah, this is a holdover from the original RFC written a number of years ago when `structopt` was in common usage.

Another example is the `structopt` crate with which you can write:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, StructOpt)]
#[structopt(name = "example", about = "An example of StructOpt usage.")]
struct Opt {
    /// Set speed

>     #[structopt(short = "s", long = "speed", default_value = "42")]

Reviewer 2: Nit: `#[structopt(default_value_t = 42)]` would be the more comparable structopt option.

}
```

Having done this, you can now construct a `Probability` with a struct
initializer and leave `value` out to use the default (3):

```rust
let prob = Probability { .. };
```

## Deriving `Default`

Previously, you might have instead implemented the `Default` trait like so (4):

```rust
impl Default for Probability {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self { value: 0.5 }
    }
}
```

You can now shorten this to (5):

```rust
impl Default for Probability {
    fn default() -> Self {
        Self { .. }
    }
}
```

However, since you had specified `value: f32 = 0.5` in the definition of
`Probability`, you can take advantage of that to write the more simpler
and more idiomatic (6):

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
pub struct Probability {
    value: f32 = 0.5,
}
```

Having done this, a `Default` implementation equivalent to the one in (5)
will be generated for you.

## More fields

As you saw in the [summary], you are not limited to a single field and all
fields need not have any defaults associated with them. Instead, you can freely
mix and match. Given the definition of `LaunchCommand` from the [motivation] (7):

```rust
struct LaunchCommand {
    cmd: String,

>     args: Vec<String> = vec![],

Reviewer 2: You refer to this later as using `Vec::new()`.

```suggestion
    args: Vec<String> = Vec::new(),
```

definition site.

## `#[non_exhaustive]` interactions

[RFC 2008]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/2008-non-exhaustive.md#structs-1

[RFC 2008] introduced the attribute `#[non_exhaustive]` that can be placed
on `struct`, `enum`, and `enum` variants. The RFC notes that upon defining
a `struct` in *crate A* such as (12):

```rust
#[non_exhaustive]
pub struct Config {
    pub width: u16,
    pub height: u16,
}
```

it is **_not_** possible to initialize a `Config` in a different *crate B* (13):

```rust
let config = Config { width: 640, height: 480 };
```

This is forbidden when `#[non_exhaustive]` is attached because the purpose of
the attribute is to permit adding fields to `Config` without causing a
breaking change. However, the RFC goes on to note that you can pattern match
if you allow for the possibility of having fields be ignored with `..` (14):

```rust
let Config { width, height, .. } = config;
```

Because this RFC gives a way to have default field values, you can now simply
invert the pattern expression and initialize a `Config` like so (15):

```rust
let config = Config { width, height, .. };

> ```

Author: Just to see if I get you right, you saying that this RFC should *disallow* `#[non_exhaustive]` *and* default fields on the same struct, and leave any interaction as an open question? I'm down with that.

> ```

Reviewer 5: Honestly, I think it would be useful to preserve the property that `Struct { field: value, .. }` as an expression (the proposed syntax) is equivalent to `Struct { field: value, ..Default::default() }`, and as such, these examples would only work if these structs derived or manually implemented `Default`.

That should cover the API concerns, although it would make `Default` become a land item, which I am personally fine with but I am not everyone, so, that would be a downside to this approach.

If it doesn't interact with `Default` at all, I agree that it shouldn't allow this, since it does break APIs.

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think requiring `Default` is unnecessarily limiting, since it would prevent using the nice new syntax with structs where some fields have defaults and others intentionally do not, e.g. if `syn::Index` (a tuple struct field name) used the new syntax it could be:
```rust
pub struct Index {
    pub index: u32,
    pub span: Span = Span::call_site(),
}
```

> ```

Author: Rereading this I believe that the part of the feature that has a bad interaction is allowing the construction of types that have private default field values. Disallowing that in general, or when the type is *also* annotated with `non_exhaustive` would eliminate the issue for every cross-crate case, right? The only potential issue would be intra-crate, and that's already out of scope of `non_exhaustive`, IIUC.

> ```

Reviewer 6: On reading the RFC, I was honestly a little confused on why interaction with non_exhaustive would be a problem.

My understanding is that non_exhaustive means you can't construct the struct outside of the crate. The ability to have defaults shouldn't have any impact on that. And prohibiting use of defaults on a non_exhaustive struct seems unnecessarily restrictive, since that could still be useful within the crate.

Now, there may be value in a non_exhaustive_but_future_fields_have_defaults functionality, but I think that should be a separate attribute, or add an argument to the existing non_exhaustive attribute, not usurp and change the meaning of the current non_exhaustive attribute.

tuple types like `struct S(i32)` or `enum E { V(i32), }`.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Field default values

### Grammar

Let the grammar of record fields in `struct`s and `enum` variants be defined
like so (in the `.lyg` notation):

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type;
```

Then, `RecordField` is changed into:

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type { "=" def:Expr }?;
```

Further, given the following partial definition for the expression grammar:

```rust
Expr = attrs:OuterAttr* kind:ExprKind;
ExprKind =
  | ...
  | Struct:{ path:Path "{" attrs:InnerAttr* fields:StructExprFieldsAndBase "}" }
  ;

StructExprFieldsAndBase =
  | Fields:{ fields:StructExprField* % "," ","? }
  | Base:{ ".." base:Expr }
  | FieldsAndBase:{ fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." base:Expr }
  ;
StructExprField = attrs:OuterAttr* kind:StructExprFieldKind;
StructExprFieldKind =
  | Shorthand:IDENT
  | Explicit:{ field:FieldName ":" expr:Expr }
  ;
```

the rule `StructExprFieldsAndBase` is extended with:

```rust

> StructExprFieldsAndBase =| FieldsAndDefault:{ fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." };

Reviewer 7: This needs a case to cover `Struct { .. }`:

```
StructExprFieldsAndBase =| Default:{ ".." }
```

```

### Static semantics

#### Defining defaults

Given a `RecordField` where the default is specified, i.e.:

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type "=" def:Expr;
```

all the following rules apply when type-checking:

1. The expression `def` must be a constant expression.

2. The expression `def` must unify with the type `ty`.

When lints check attributes such as `#[allow(lint_name)]` are placed on a
`RecordField`, it also applies to `def` if it exists.

#### Initialization expressions

Given an expression `τ` of the form (e.g. `Foo { x: 1, .. }`):

```rust
path:Path "{" attrs:InnerAttr* fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." "}"
```

all the following rules apply when type-checking:

1. All `fields` in `τ` mentioned must exist in the `struct` or `enum` variant
   referenced by `path`. No field in `fields` may be mentioned twice.

2. For each `field: expr` pair in `fields` of `τ`,
   `expr` must unify with the type of `field` in the `struct`
   or `enum` variant referenced by `path`.

3. For each `field: expression` pair in `fields` of `τ`,
   `field` must be visible in the context which `τ` occurs in.

> 4. For each field `f` in `τ` *not* mentioned in `fields`, a default value must

Reviewer 2: Don't you mean each field `f` in the referenced `struct` or `enum` variant?

   exist for `f` in the `struct` or `enum` variant referenced by `path`.

---------------------

**Lemma 1:** If `τ` is of a type `σ` where `σ: Sync`, and if all `field: expr`
has an `expr` component which is a valid constant expression, then `τ` is
also a valid constant expression.

**Proof:** It trivially holds that if all `expr`s in `τ` are
constant expressions and all default values for fields omitted
are also constant expressions, then `τ` is a constant expression.

> **Lemma 2:** If an expression `x` of form `Path { .. }` is of a type `σ` where

Reviewer 2: If this stays in the RFC (I agree with @compiler-errors that it probably shouldn't), these two cases can be unified by letting `τ` have zero or more fields specified rather than one or more.

`σ: Sync`, then `x` is a constant expression.

**Proof:** `x` is a special case of `τ` with all fields according to the default
values. Since there are no explicitly provided fields, by Lemma 1 it holds.

### Dynamic semantics

Given a well-formed expression `τ` according to the aforementioned form,
the operational semantics is the same as the semantics of an expression
`path { new_fields }` with `new_fields = fields ∪ default_fields` where:

+ `∪` computes the left-biased union where equal elements are determined
  solely on equality of field names.

+ `fields` are the set of explicitly given `field: expr` pairs.

+ `default_fields` are the fields in `τ`'s data-type or variant which

>   have provided default values.

Reviewer: I also think section this can be cut from the RFC. I don't think we go into this much detail for new expressions, and it feels very very verbose to explain their dynamic semantics, especially because the only important part that users *would* care about is something like initialization order which wouldn't differ from FRU anyways.

## `#[derive(Default)]`

When generating an implementation of `Default` for a `struct` named `$s` on
which `#[derive(Default)]` has been attached, the compiler will omit all fields
which have default values provided in the `struct`. The the associated function

> `default` shall then be defined as (where `$f_i` denotes a vector of the fields

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
`default` shall then be defined as (where `$f_i` denotes the `i`-th field
```

of `$s`):

```rust
fn default() -> Self {
    $s { $f_i: Default::default(), .. }
}
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The usual drawback of increasing the complexity of the language applies.
However, the degree to which complexity is increased is not substantial.

In particular, the syntax `Foo { .. }` mirrors the identical and already
existing pattern syntax. This makes the addition of `Foo { .. }` at worst

> low-cost and potentially cost-free.

Author: That is an excellent call-out of a non-obvious interaction I hadn't accounted for.

> low-cost and potentially cost-free.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it would be worth adding syntax alternatives like `Foo { ..some_keyword }` to the "Rationale and alternatives" section.

> low-cost and potentially cost-free.

Reviewer 8: Well, that is already the case?
`x if x == Foo { a, b }` matches less than `Foo { a, b }` assuming `a` and `b` variables are in scope.
Although f you define `a` and `b` as constants then `Foo { a, b }` will match the exact value, which is.... interesting.

I don't think this is a problem, it is expected that patterns behave differently from expressions.

> low-cost and potentially cost-free.

Reviewer 9: > In particular, the syntax `Foo { .. }` mirrors the identical and already
existing pattern syntax.

Indeed, and that's a downside -- it mirrors the syntax but has different semantics. The text here makes it sound like that's a good thing.

The main complexity comes instead from introducing `field: Type = expr`.
However, as seen in the [prior-art], there are several widely-used languages
that have a notion of field / property / instance-variable defaults.
Therefore, the addition is intuitive and thus the cost is seen as limited. As
an implementation detail, `rustc` *already* parses `field: Type = expr`
purely to provide an appropriate diagnostic error:

```
error: default values on `struct` fields aren't supported
 --> src/lib.rs:2:28
  |
2 |     pub alpha: &'static str = "",
  |                            ^^^^^ help: remove this unsupported default value
```

# Rationale and alternatives

> [rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

Reviewer 10: I would like to see a section on differences from FRU (especially the interaction with privacy and `#[non_exhaustive]`) including why it is the way it is and the reason for diverging from it in this RFC. And possibly a future possibility about how they can be made more consistent in the future.

I'm generally a big fan of this RFC, but undoing past mistakes by adding more features without fixing the features we have leads to an uneven and complex language surface. So let's try to make sure we can do both.

Author: I think that it is reasonable to change this RFC to explicitly follow RFC-0736, and disallow the construction of types with private fields, if that will make this RFC less controversial. Particularly when considering the interaction with `#[derive(Default)]`, the feature is useful on its own without expanding the field privacy rules.

Reviewer 10: That sketch uses a completely new syntax, so we wouldn't be fixing FRU so much as deprecating it and replacing it with something else.

It seems better to design this one to work the way we want from the beginning? Especially since people will have to opt in and might rely on restrictions we implement today (even if we document that those restrictions will be lifted in the future.. people don't usually _read the docs_ on language features so much as _try them out in the playground_).

it to run the process in reverse.

In some places, Rust could do a better job than it currently does of adhering to
this principle. In this particular case, the pattern syntax `Foo { a, b: c, .. }`
has no counterpart in the expression syntax. This RFC rectifies this by
permitting `Foo { a, b: c, .. }` as an expression syntax; this is identical
to the expression syntax and thus consistency has been gained.

However, it is not merely sufficient to use the same syntax for expressions;
the semantics also have to be similar in kind for things to work out well.
This RFC argues that this is the case because in both contexts, `..` indicates
something partially ignorable is going on: "I am *destructuring*/*constructing*
this struct, and by the way there are some more fields I don't care about
*and let's* drop those* / *and let's fill in with default values*".
In a way, the use of `_` to mean both a catch-all pattern and type / value
placeholder is similar to `..`; in the case of `_` both cases indicate something
unimportant going on. For patterns, `_` matches everything and doesn't give
access to the value; for types, the placeholder is just an unbounded inference
variable.

> ## On privacy

Reviewer: It would be useful to cross-link to RFC 736 which explains privacy for FRU, and link that here: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/0736-privacy-respecting-fru.md

Author: Added a link to it, explaining how this RFC proposes to somewhat walk it back. Although, I'm not overly concerned with the privacy question, I think there would be value in landing this even if you *can't* construct types with private fields, and relaxing that restriction at a later time if we find it is indeed too restrictive.

Author: Changed it so that we don't change the privacy rules, but mention it in future possibilities.

`..Default::default()` or extending the language such that `Foo { .. }` becomes
sugar for `Foo { ..Default::default() }`. While the latter idea does not satisfy
any of the [motivation] set out, the former does to a small extent.

In particular, `Foo { .. }` as sugar slightly improves ergonomics.
However, it has some notable problems:

+ Because it desugars to `Foo { ..Default::default() }`, it cannot be required
  that the expression is a constant one. This carries all the problems noted in
  the previous section on why default field values should be a `const` context.

+ There is no way of implementing a `Default` implementation that has mandatory
  fields for users to specify during value construction.

+ It provides zero improvements to the ergonomics of *specifying* defaults,
  only for using them. Arguably, the most important aspect of this RFC is
  not the syntax `Foo { .. }` but rather the ability to provide default values
  for field.

+ By extension, the improvement to documentation clarity is lost.

+ The trait `Default` must now become a `#[lang_item]`. This is a sign of
  increasing the overall magic in the system; meanwhile, this proposal makes

>   the default values provided usable by other custom derive macros.

Author: I'm leaving it for completeness' sake. I'm in agreement with your rationale.

```rust
#[derive(Builder, Debug, PartialEq)]
struct Lorem {
    #[builder(default = "42")]
    pub ipsum: u32,
}
```

Under this RFC, the code would be

```rust
#[derive(Default, Debug, PartialEq)]
struct Lorem {
    pub ipsum: u32 = 42,
}
```

### `#[derive(Derivative)]`

[`derivative`]: https://crates.io/crates/derivative

The crate [`derivative`] provides the `#[derivative(Default)]` attribute.
With it, you may write:

```rust
#[derive(Derivative)]
#[derivative(Default)]
struct RegexOptions {
    #[derivative(Default(value="10 * (1 << 20)"))]
    size_limit: usize,
    #[derivative(Default(value="2 * (1 << 20)"))]
    dfa_size_limit: usize,
    #[derivative(Default(value="true"))]
    unicode: bool,
}

#[derive(Derivative)]
#[derivative(Default)]
enum Foo {
    #[derivative(Default)]
    Bar,
    Baz,
}
```

Contrast this with the equivalent in the style of this RFC:

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct RegexOptions {
    size_limit: usize = 10 * (1 << 20),
    dfa_size_limit: usize = 2 * (1 << 20),
    unicode: bool = true,
}

#[derive(Default)]
enum Foo {
    #[default]
    Bar,
    Baz,
}
```

There a few aspects to note:

> 1. The signal to noise ratio is high as compared to the notation in this RFC.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
1. The signal to noise ratio is low as compared to the notation in this RFC.
```

## Tuple structs and tuple variants

Although it could, this proposal does not offer a way to specify default values
for tuple struct / variant fields. For example, you may not write:

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct Alpha(u8 = 42, bool = true);

#[derive(Default)]
enum Ingredient {
    Tomato(TasteQuality, Color = Color::Red),
    Lettuce,
}
```

While well-defined semantics could be given for these positional fields,
there are some tricky design choices; in particular:

+ It's unclear whether the following should be permitted:

  ```rust
  #[derive(Default)]
  struct Beta(&'static str = "hello", bool);
  ```

  In particular, the fields with defaults are not at the end of the struct.
  A restriction could imposed to enforce that. However, it would also be
  useful to admit the above definition of `Beta` so that `#[derive(Default)]`
  can make use of `"hello"`.

+ The syntax `Alpha(..)` as an expression already has a meaning.
  Namely, it is sugar for `Alpha(RangeFull)`. Thus unfortunately,
  this syntax cannot be used to mean `Alpha(42, true)`.
  In some future edition, the syntax `Alpha(...)` (three dots)
  could be used for filling in defaults. This would ostensibly entail

>   adding the pattern syntax `Alpha(...)` as well.

Reviewer 10: I believe it is still possible to reuse the `..` syntax, though the complexity of making it work in the compiler might be undesirable. I'm also not a fan of using `...` in tuple structs and `..` in regular structs. I think they should be consistent.

But we do have `...` available today in current editions.

There is another possibility not mentioned here, which is using `_` for defaulted fields (though it could equally apply to regular structs).

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
+ The syntax `Alpha(..)` as an expression already has a meaning.
  Namely, it is sugar for `Alpha(RangeFull)`. Thus unfortunately,
  this syntax cannot be used to mean `Alpha(42, true)`.
  In newer editions, the syntax `Alpha(...)` (three dots)
  can be used for filling in defaults. This would ostensibly entail
  adding the pattern syntax `Alpha(...)` as well.
```

Further, given the following partial definition for the expression grammar:

```rust
Expr = attrs:OuterAttr* kind:ExprKind;
ExprKind =
  | ...
  | Struct:{ path:Path "{" attrs:InnerAttr* fields:StructExprFieldsAndBase "}" }
  ;

StructExprFieldsAndBase =
  | Fields:{ fields:StructExprField* % "," ","? }
  | Base:{ ".." base:Expr }
  | FieldsAndBase:{ fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." base:Expr }
  ;
StructExprField = attrs:OuterAttr* kind:StructExprFieldKind;
StructExprFieldKind =
  | Shorthand:IDENT
  | Explicit:{ field:FieldName ":" expr:Expr }
  ;
```

the rule `StructExprFieldsAndBase` is extended with:

```rust
StructExprFieldsAndBase =| FieldsAndDefault:{ fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." };
StructExprFieldsAndBase =| Default:{ ".." }
```

### Static semantics

#### Defining defaults

Given a `RecordField` where the default is specified, i.e.:

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type "=" def:Expr;
```

all the following rules apply when type-checking:

1. The expression `def` must be a constant expression.

2. The expression `def` must coerce to the type `ty`.

When lints check attributes such as `#[allow(lint_name)]` are placed on a

> `RecordField`, it also applies to `def` if it exists.

Reviewer 11: Are the default expressions able to make use of generics, including those defined in function scope? E.g., if I have:

```rust
fn foo<const A: usize>() {
    struct Bar<const B: usize> {
        field1: usize = A,
        field2: usize = B,
    }
}
```

Are both fields valid, or neither? In some sense, this is asking whether the desugaring is to a free-standing `const` item whose value is referenced, or an inline `const` block.

It's probably also worth asking/defining when the default expressions are evaluated -- e.g., if the expression panics, does that prevent compilation of that struct definition? Presuming they can reference generics, can I define a struct that doesn't use that constant (e.g., in the example above, if we explicitly initialize the struct in all use sites with both fields, does that mean that the struct can have default values that always/conditionally panic?)

Author: Current output for this on my draft impl:

```
error[E0401]: can't use generic parameters from outer item
  --> f80.rs:51:25
   |
49 | fn qux<const A: usize>() {
   |              - const parameter from outer item
50 |     struct Bar<const B: usize> {
   |                - help: try introducing a local generic parameter here: `A,`
51 |         field1: usize = A,
   |                         ^ use of generic parameter from outer item

error: internal compiler error: compiler/rustc_middle/src/ty/consts.rs:326:13: try_from_lit: received const param which shouldn't be possible
  --> f80.rs:52:25
   |
52 |         field2: usize = B,
   |                         ^

thread 'rustc' panicked at compiler/rustc_middle/src/ty/consts.rs:326:13:
```

I think that `B` *should* be allowed, while `A` isn't, which is what we do already in other cases for items.

Reviewer 11: That seems reasonable to me (i.e., treat as const items).

What about the evaluation side of things?

Reviewer 11: Right, the tricky bit (IMO) is for the case `x = Config { height: 1, .. }` -- what is the MIR for that?

```
_0 = Config{ height: { const Config::__DEFAULT_FOR_HEIGHT; 1 }, width: const Config::__DEFAULT_FOR_WIDTH };
```

I think it probably ought to be something like this, where we *still evaluate* the defaults regardless of actually using them. But in any case, that needs specifying.

Author: Funnily enough, the current output for your examples (after cleanup):

1. success
2.
```
error[E0277]: the size for values of type `T` cannot be known at compilation time
   --> f81.rs:6:21
    |
5   |     struct Foo<T> {
    |                - this type parameter needs to be `Sized`
6   |         v: Vec<T> = Vec::new(),
    |                     ^^^^^^^^^^ doesn't have a size known at compile-time
    |
note: required by an implicit `Sized` bound in `Vec`
   --> /home/gh-estebank/rust/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs:397:16
    |
397 | pub struct Vec<T, #[unstable(feature = "allocator_api", issue = "32838")] A: Allocator = Global> {
    |                ^ required by the implicit `Sized` requirement on this type parameter in `Vec`

error[E0277]: the size for values of type `T` cannot be known at compilation time
   --> f81.rs:6:21
    |
5   |     struct Foo<T> {
    |                - this type parameter needs to be `Sized`
6   |         v: Vec<T> = Vec::new(),
    |                     ^^^ doesn't have a size known at compile-time
    |
note: required by an implicit `Sized` bound in `Vec`
   --> /home/gh-estebank/rust/library/alloc/src/vec/mod.rs:397:16
    |
397 | pub struct Vec<T, #[unstable(feature = "allocator_api", issue = "32838")] A: Allocator = Global> {
    |                ^ required by the implicit `Sized` requirement on this type parameter in `Vec`
```
3. Needs `#![feature(generic_const_exprs)]`, works as expected, and detects underflow when constructing the value:
```
error[E0080]: evaluation of `S::<0>::a::{constant#0}` failed
 --> f81.rs:5:14
  |
5 |     a: u32 = A - 1,
  |              ^^^^^ attempt to compute `0_u32 - 1_u32`, which would overflow
```
```

Author: Now the last case (`Vec<T>`) [now works](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/129514/commits/14777ce5eb88e76047ace5144b4ae1111fcbce1f).

used because some fields are mandatory.

The main complexity comes instead from introducing `field: Type = expr`.
However, as seen in the [prior-art], there are several widely-used languages
that have a notion of field / property / instance-variable defaults.
Therefore, the addition is intuitive and thus the cost is seen as limited. As
an implementation detail, `rustc` *already* parses `field: Type = expr`
purely to provide an appropriate diagnostic error:

```
error: default values on `struct` fields aren't supported
 --> src/lib.rs:2:28
  |
2 |     pub alpha: &'static str = "",
  |                            ^^^^^ help: remove this unsupported default value
```

An issue arises when considering `const` patterns. A pattern `Foo { .. }` can
match more things than just the expression `Foo { .. }`, because the pattern
matches any value of the unmentioned fields, but the expression sets them to a
particular value. This means that, with the unstable `inline_const_pat`, the arm
`const { Foo { .. } } =>` matches less than the arm `Foo { .. } =>` (assuming a
type like `struct Foo { a: i32 = 1 }`). A way to mitigate this might be to use
an alternative syntax, like `...` or `..kw#default`.

> 

Reviewer 11: Maybe I missed how it's prevented, but it seems like a drawback not called out here is that `Foo { .. }` and `Foo::default()` could mean different things with the RFC as proposed, since the default impl can be manual and differ significantly in terms of the values it provides.

Should we perhaps forbid mixing manual Default impls and the default field value syntax, or otherwise at least suggest something here?

Author: Oversight on my part (that was brought up in my original thread).

I feel like it would be best to *lint* against that (maybe even deny-by-default), but otherwise allow it. It is a foot-gun, but there might be good reasons for an API to be designed that way (even if I can't picture them now). We can also disallow that today and allow it in the future.

Author: We can always make the lint check for that, triggering only if the manual `impl` is identical to what we would have derived.

Author: The above is now mentioned in Future possibilities

Thus in conclusion, while desugaring `..` to `Default::default()` has lower cost,
it also provides significantly less value to the point of not being worth it.

## `..` is useful as a marker

One possible change to the current design is to permit filling in defaults
by simply writing `Foo {}`; in other words, `..` is simply dropped from the
expression.

Among the benefits are:

+ To enhance ergonomics of initialization further.

+ To introduce less syntax.

+ To be more in line with how other languages treat default values.

Among the drawbacks are:

+ The syntax `Foo { .. }` is no longer introduced to complement the identical
  pattern syntax. As aforementioned, destruction (and pattern matching)
  generally attempts to follow construction in Rust. Because of that,
  introducing `Foo { .. }` is essentially cost-free in terms of the complexity
  budget. It is arguably even cost-negative.

+ By writing `Foo { .. }`, you have there is explicit indication that default
  values are being used; this enhances local reasoning further.

This RFC requires the `..` to get defaulted fields because it wants to continue
to allow the workflow of intentionally *not* including `..` in the struct

> literal expression so that when a user adds a field they get compilation errors

Reviewer 12: What about structs that are forever stable and the default field is something benign like PhantomData? My go-to example is euclid's types, where the extra overhead of `..` doesn't make sense. `Size2D { width: 123, height: 456, .. }` leaks implementation details about the internal PhantomData field and offers nothing in return.

Author: Given the overall design of the language, I believe that we're unlikely to have *implicit* default values, where `Size2D { width: 123, height: 456 }` can actually have many more defaulted fields. With the `const` restriction it might make sense, but it goes against the grain of surfacing "surprising" semantic behavior in the syntax.

Reviewer 10: I think with a const restriction it's not that crazy to think we would have implicit defaults (especially for ZSTs like PhantomData), but would definitely leave it for future work.

You could imagine using unnamed fields for this, for example:
`struct Foo<'a> { _: PhantomData<&'a ()> = PhantomData }`

`foo(_ { bar: 42 })` where the function argument type is inferred from the `foo`
definition. struct literal type inference with default struct fields would also
allow people to write APIs that "feel" like named function arguments when
calling them, although not when defining them.

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = 1080,
    width: u32 = 1920,
}
fn open_window(config: Config) {
    // logic...
}

open_window(_ { width: 800, .. });
```

## Accessing default values from the type

If one were to conceptualize default field values in the following way:

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = Self::HEIGHT,
    width: u32 = Self::WIDTH,
}

impl Config {
    const HEIGHT: u32 = 1080,
    const WIDTH: u32 = 1920,
}
```

It would follow that one should be able to access the value of these defaults
*without* constructing `Config`, by writing `Config::HEIGHT`. I do not believe
this should be done or advanced, but there's nothing in this RFC that precludes
*some* mechanism to access these values in the future. With the RFC as written,
these values can be accessed by instantiating `Config { .. }.height`, as long
as `height` is visible in the current scope.

## Non-const values

> Although there are strong reasons to restrict default values only to const

Reviewer 8: Can you please write exactly what are the "strong reasons" in this section too?

Reviewer 13: There's an entire section about this: https://github.com/estebank/rfcs/blob/default-fields/text/0000-default-field-values.md#on-const-contexts

Reviewer 8: I mean that section should be linked here.

Author: Done

this RFC so that constructor functions are regained if so desired.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

1. What is the right interaction wrt. `#[non_exhaustive]`?

   In particular, if given the following definition:

   ```rust
   #[non_exhaustive]
   pub struct Config {
       pub height: u32,
       pub width: u32,
   }
   ```

   it could be possible to construct a `Config` like so, if the construction of
   types without default field values is allowed (to support semver changes):

   ```rust
   let config = Config { width: 640, height: 480, .. };
   ```

   then adding a field to `Config` can only happen iff that field
   is provided a default value.

   This arrangement, while diminishing the usefulness of `#[non_exhaustive]`,
   makes the ruleset of the language simpler, more consistent, and also
   simplifies type checking as `#[non_exhaustive]` is entirely ignored
   when checking `Foo { fields, .. }` expressions.

   As an alternative, users who desire the semantics described above can
   omit `#[non_exhaustive]` from their type and instead add a private
   defaulted field that has a ZST.

# Future possibilities

> [future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

Reviewer 10: If we want to preserve the ability to use this syntax in const, `#[derive(const Default)]` could be an interesting way of still getting the shorthand I seem to care so much about.

Reviewer 10: To be more specific, what would you think of allowing this, assuming we had such a thing as `const Trait` bounds?

```rust
#[derive(const Default)]
struct State {
    foo: HashMap<u32, String>,
    bar: Arc<Mutex<Vec<Bar>>>,
    baz: i32 = 5,
}

let state = State { .. };
```

This seems nicer than making the struct author write `= Default::default()` many times. Structs which do not wish to provide a default for all fields would, of course, not implement Default (const or otherwise).

Attempting to use the `..` syntax with a struct that implements non-const `Default` would result in an error message saying the struct needs to implement `const Default` and suggesting to use `..Struct::default()` (if no non-accessible fields), field-wise initialization otherwise.

Author: I have some concerns around this syntax.

The proposed code is equivalent to the following, right?

```rust
const fn d<D: Default>() -> D {
    D::default()
}
#[derive(Default)]
struct State {
    foo: HashMap<u32, String> = d(),
    bar: Arc<Mutex<Vec<Bar>>> = d(),
    baz: i32 = 5,
}

let state = State { .. };
```

It *is* more verbose than absolutely needed, but it has some benefits as well.

`#[derive(const Default)]` is an expansion of what `derive` can do:

   - how do we teach it?
   - how googleable is it? how will people that don't know about this find out about it in the first place or find the appropriate documentation when they encounter it in the wild?
   - how clearly does it communicate what it does? Because it can be read as affecting the derived `impl Default` to be `const`, not changing the behavior of default values
   - if that is allowed, then does `#[derive(const Clone)]` work? what about `#[derive(const Trait)]`?

My biggest concern about this is that it introduces an entire new concept, that is an exception to other rules, for the benefit or removing 1 call * # of fields at worst. That's of course also setting aside that [we can't construct an `Arc` in `const`](https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=nightly&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=e321d81465a207aed95195a80adf0a1e) today, but that's orthogonal.

Reviewer 14: I'd like to see what @tmandry mentions added as a section in the alternatives (had the same thought while reading).

It just seems a bit non-symmetric that the specified defaults are used when implementing `Default` but the `Default` impls on fields aren't used with the `{ .. }` syntax, and this then creates the odd discrepancy between the meaning of `{ .. }` and `{ ..<_>::default() }`.

CC @yoshuawuyts @oli-obk @fmease, regarding the ongoing work to allow for `const` impls of `Default`.

Reviewer 10: I would say this is more of a future possibility than an alternative. I should have explained I'm not saying we should do this for only `#[derive(Default)]`, but that we will most likely want a general `const` trait modifier, and probably several kinds of `#[derive(const ...)]`, and this would jive well with that. So it _would_ be changing the `impl Default` to be `const`.

Reviewer 10: I do it as pretty important to eventually unify these two features, though.

## `#[non_exhaustive]` interactions

This RFC doesn't allow mixing default field values and `#[non_exhaustive]`
because of the interaction with the allowance to build struct literals
that have private fields:

```rust
#[non_exhaustive]
pub struct Foo {
    bar: i32 = 42,
}

// another crate
let _ = Foo { .. }; // Currently forbidden, but would be allowed by this RFC without the attribute
```

> There are several options:

Reviewer 10: I don't know if I grasp the rationale for all of these. Related to what I said above, I think there needs to be a way in the future to use this syntax with `#[non_exhaustive]` structs, very possibly with an opt in like `#[non_exhaustive(default)]` or something.

for tuple struct / variant fields. For example, you may not write:

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct Alpha(u8 = 42, bool = true);

#[derive(Default)]
enum Ingredient {
    Tomato(TasteQuality, Color = Color::Red),
    Lettuce,
}
```

While well-defined semantics could be given for these positional fields,
there are some tricky design choices; in particular:

+ It's unclear whether the following should be permitted:

  ```rust
  #[derive(Default)]
  struct Beta(&'static str = "hello", bool);
  ```

  In particular, the fields with defaults are not at the end of the struct.
  A restriction could imposed to enforce that. However, it would also be
  useful to admit the above definition of `Beta` so that `#[derive(Default)]`
  can make use of `"hello"`.

+ The syntax `Alpha(..)` as an expression already has a meaning.
  Namely, it is sugar for `Alpha(RangeFull)`. Thus unfortunately,
  this syntax cannot be used to mean `Alpha(42, true)`.
  In some future edition, the syntax `Alpha(...)` (three dots)
  could be used for filling in defaults. This would ostensibly entail
  adding the pattern syntax `Alpha(...)` as well.

> 
>   Until a syntax such as `Alpha(...)` is made available,
>   tuple structs could be constructed with `Alpha { 0: 43 }`.
>   However, that is not particularly ergonomic and that diminishes the value
>   of having field defaults for tuple structs.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
```

Since it is now available

`foo(_ { bar: 42 })` where the function argument type is inferred from the `foo`
definition. struct literal type inference with default struct fields would also
allow people to write APIs that "feel" like named function arguments when
calling them, although not when defining them.

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = 1080,
    width: u32 = 1920,
}
fn open_window(config: Config) {
    // logic...
}

open_window(_ { width: 800, .. });
```

## Accessing default values from the type

If one were to conceptualize default field values in the following way:

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = Self::HEIGHT,
    width: u32 = Self::WIDTH,
}

impl Config {
    const HEIGHT: u32 = 1080,
    const WIDTH: u32 = 1920,
}
```

It would follow that one should be able to access the value of these defaults
*without* constructing `Config`, by writing `Config::HEIGHT`. I do not believe
this should be done or advanced, but there's nothing in this RFC that precludes
*some* mechanism to access these values in the future. With the RFC as written,
these values can be accessed by instantiating `Config { .. }.height`, as long
as `height` is visible in the current scope.

> ## Non-const values

Reviewer 10: If we did this we could immediately start allowing use of this syntax for all `Default` impls.

Related thought.. Should there be a way of opting into - or out of - a guarantee of const init? What would syntax for that look like? Perhaps this?

```rust
struct Foo const {
  height: u32 = 0,
  width: u32 = 0,
}
```

Reviewer 8: > Related thought.. Should there be a way of opting into - or out of - a guarantee of const init? What would syntax for that look like?

Wont existing const blocks be enough?
At least for const init.

```rust
struct Foo {
  height: u32 = const { 0 },
  width: u32 = const { 0 },
}
```

Maybe in the future syntax sugar can be added.

Reviewer 8: I guess it may be useful for heap allocations, for example for owned collections? I don't think that is something that will ever be solved with const, proposals talk about having a separate const heap, but there is no need to have separate heap here.
Not sure whether really prohibiting allocations here is a good thing or not, there are a lot of places in Rust where you can have stupid implicit behaviour and launch missiles, for example during deref. I personally don't really like allocations and control flow not being obvious, but Rust is already bad at it, this is not Zig.

I think it is ok to just run with const only for now, then we can test this feature, and see how bad not having side effects actually is.

Author: > A different approach which I'm exploring here is to make the `..` syntax not be always-const-friendly.

I wonder if it maybe doesn't make sense to allow the defaults to be non-const, *but always* warn-by-default lint when that feature is leveraged. This means that someone that really needs can use it and has to explicitly opt-into it by marking the crate, module, item, field with an `#[allow(non_const_defaults)]`. This pushes back against egregious accidental usage of the feature, while still allowing it for the cases where it is needed for corner-case situations. Note that the intent for this RFC is to allow for something that `derive(Default)` doesn't let you do: types where *some* fields are mandatory. It is not an attempt of making `S { ..Default::default() }` less verbose.

I also believe that starting with `const` expressions first and extend support for non-`const` expressions later will make the process of implementing and stabilizing each independent part much smoother, while not crossing any one-way doors and providing a lot of value earlier rather than later.

```

## Accessing default values from the type

If one were to conceptualize default field values in the following way:

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = Self::HEIGHT,
    width: u32 = Self::WIDTH,
}

impl Config {
    const HEIGHT: u32 = 1080,
    const WIDTH: u32 = 1920,
}
```

It would follow that one should be able to access the value of these defaults
*without* constructing `Config`, by writing `Config::HEIGHT`. I do not believe
this should be done or advanced, but there's nothing in this RFC that precludes
*some* mechanism to access these values in the future. With the RFC as written,
these values can be accessed by instantiating `Config { .. }.height`, as long
as `height` is visible in the current scope.

Note that the *opposite* is supported, writing that code will compile, so any
API author that wants to make these `const` values on the type can (only
restriction is that `Self` isn't accepted in current `const` contexts):

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = Config::HEIGHT,
    width: u32 = Config::WIDTH,
}

impl Config {
    const HEIGHT: u32 = 1080,
    const WIDTH: u32 = 1920,
}
```
## Non-const values

[strong reasons]: #on-const-contexts

> Although there are [strong reasons] to restrict default values only to const

Reviewer 15: One strong class of non-const values is *other* default implementations. Without const trait implementations, this will be an annoying restriction.

Author: Added note of this.

fields need not have any defaults associated with them. Instead, you can freely
mix and match. Given the definition of `LaunchCommand` from the [motivation] (7):

```rust
struct LaunchCommand {
    cmd: String,
    args: Vec<String> = Vec::new(),
    some_special_setting: Option<FancyConfig> = None,
    setting_most_people_will_ignore: Option<FlyMeToTheMoon> = None,
}
```

you can omit all fields but `cmd` (8):

```rust
let ls_cmd = LaunchCommand {
    cmd: "ls".to_string(),
    ..
};
```

You can also elect to override the provided defaults (9):

```rust
let ls_cmd2 = LaunchCommand {
    cmd: "ls".to_string(),
    args: vec!["-lah".to_string()],
    some_special_setting: make_special_setting(),
    // setting_most_people_will_ignore is still defaulted.
    ..
};
```

## Default fields values are [`const` context]s

[`const` context]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/reference/blob/66ef5396eccca909536b91cad853f727789c8ebe/src/const_eval.md#const-context

As you saw in (7), `Vec::new()`, a function call, was used.
However, this assumes that `Vec::new` is a *`const fn`*. That is, when you
provide a default value `field: Type = value`, the given `value` must be a

> *constant expression* such that it is valid in a [`const` context].

Reviewer 16: What are the other requirements on the value type? `Vec` example indicates the type doesn't need to be `Copy`. Does it need to be `Clone`? The decision here might be especially important for ZSTs which are used as some kind of token and are supposed to guarantee that they cannot be conjured/cloned out of thin air

Reviewer 17: > What are the other requirements on the value type? `Vec` example indicates the type doesn't need to be `Copy`. Does it need to be `Clone`?

I don't think there should be. The value is given as a const expression, which can be thought as being constructed on each usage. This is also why `[CONSTANT; 10]` always work and does not require the element type to be `Clone` or `Copy`.

> The decision here might be especially important for ZSTs which are used as some kind of token and are supposed to guarantee that they cannot be conjured/cloned out of thin air

If the definition site explicitly mark a default field by using a valid way to construct it. It does not create any extra way to conjure a ZST. It's the same as they define a `impl S { pub const DEFAULT_FIELD: ArbitraryNoCopyTy = some_constructor(); }` and users write `S { field: S::DEFAULT_FIELD }`.

  Thus, enforcing constness gives a helping hand in respecting semantic version.

  Note that if Rust would ever gain a mechanism to state that a
  function will not diverge, e.g.:

  ```rust
  nopanic fn foo() -> u8 { 42 } // The weaker variant; more easily attainable.
  total fn bar() -> u8 { 24 } // No divergence, period.
  ```

  then the same semver problem would manifest itself for those types of
  functions. However, Rust does not have any such enforcement mechanism
  right now and if it did, it is generally harder to ensure that a function
  is total than it is to ensure that it is deterministic; thus, while
  it is regrettable, this is an acceptable trade-off.

+ Finally, note that `const fn`s, can become quite expressive. For example,
  it is possible to use `loop`s, `match`es, `let` statements, and `panic!(..)`s.
  Another feasible extension in the future is allocation.

  Therefore, constant expressions should be enough to satisfy most expressive
  needs.

## Instead of `Foo { ..Default::default() }`

As an alternative to the proposed design is either explicitly writing out
`..Default::default()` or extending the language such that `Foo { .. }` becomes

> sugar for `Foo { ..Default::default() }`. While the latter idea does not satisfy
> any of the [motivation] set out, the former does to a small extent.

Reviewer 18: ```suggestion
sugar for `Foo { ..Default::default() }`. While the former idea does not satisfy
any of the [motivation] set out, the latter does to a small extent.
```

    };
}
```

The builder pattern is quite common in the Rust ecosystem, but as shown above its need is greatly
reduced with `struct` field defaults.

## `#[derive(Default)]` in more cases

The `#[derive(..)]` ("custom derive") mechanism works by defining procedural
*macros*. Because they are macros, these operate on abstract *syntax* and
don't have more information available. Therefore, when you `#[derive(Default)]`
on a data type definition as with:

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct Foo {
    bar: u8,
    baz: String,
}
```

it only has the immediate "textual" definition available to it.

Because Rust currently does not have an in-language way to define default values,
you cannot `#[derive(Default)]` in the cases where you are not happy with the
natural default values that each field's type provides. By extending the syntax
of Rust such that default values can be provided, `#[derive(Default)]` can be
used in many more circumstances and thus boilerplate is further reduced.  The
addition of a single field, expands the code written by the `struct` author from
a single `derive` line to a whole `Default` `impl`, which becomes more verbose
linearly with the number of fields.

> ### Imperfect derives

Author: @scottmcm I didn't mean this section to propose any changes to the bounds of derives, but rather argue that with default values the need for perfect default derives is lessened, no more. If removing this argument from the RFC is needed, or reword it to make that clearer, I'm more than happy to do so. I *did* file https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3683 to propose changes to the bounds because I felt that both changes in conjunction would work well together, but I'm not proposing changes to the bounds in *this* RFC (as they are not necessary).

tuple types like `struct S(i32)` or `enum E { V(i32), }`.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## Field default values

### Grammar

Let the grammar of record fields in `struct`s and `enum` variants be defined
like so (in the `.lyg` notation):

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type;
```

Then, `RecordField` is changed into:

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type { "=" def:Expr }?;
```

Further, given the following partial definition for the expression grammar:

```rust
Expr = attrs:OuterAttr* kind:ExprKind;
ExprKind =
  | ...
  | Struct:{ path:Path "{" attrs:InnerAttr* fields:StructExprFieldsAndBase "}" }
  ;

StructExprFieldsAndBase =
  | Fields:{ fields:StructExprField* % "," ","? }
  | Base:{ ".." base:Expr }
  | FieldsAndBase:{ fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." base:Expr }
  ;
StructExprField = attrs:OuterAttr* kind:StructExprFieldKind;
StructExprFieldKind =
  | Shorthand:IDENT
  | Explicit:{ field:FieldName ":" expr:Expr }
  ;
```

the rule `StructExprFieldsAndBase` is extended with:

```rust

> StructExprFieldsAndBase =| FieldsAndDefault:{ fields:StructExprField+ % "," "," ".." };

Reviewer 2: Why not just frame it as updating `Base` and `FieldsAndBase` so that `base` is optional?

StructExprFieldsAndBase =| Default:{ ".." }
```

### Static semantics

#### Defining defaults

Given a `RecordField` where the default is specified, i.e.:

```rust
RecordField = attrs:OuterAttr* vis:Vis? name:IDENT ":" ty:Type "=" def:Expr;
```

all the following rules apply when type-checking:

1. The expression `def` must be a constant expression.

2. The expression `def` must coerce to the type `ty`.

> 3. Generic parameters of the current items are accessible

Reviewer 19: Do these ever interact with type level constants in any interesting ways? Probably not, but it should be explicitly mentioned that there are no issues and we can just think of it as auto-inserted const blocks at each struct literal usage.

After all, this could be implemented with assoc consts and magic field to const name mappings and a macro that expands to the right literal

   ```rust
   struct Bar<const A: usize> {
       field: usize = A,
   }
   ```

4. Default const expressions are *not* evaluated at definition time, only
   during instantiation. This means that the following will not fail to compile:
   ```rust
   struct Bar {
       field1: usize = panic!(),
       field2: usize = 42,
   }

   let _ = Bar { field1: 0, .. };
   ```
   Having said that, it can be possible to proactivelly attempt to evaluate the
   default values and emit a lint in a case where the expression is assured to always
   fail (which would only be possible for expressions that do not reference `const`
   parameters).

5. The `struct`'s parameters are properly propagated, meaning the following is
   possible:
   ```rust
   struct Bar<T> {
       field: Vec<T> = Vec::new(),
   }

   let _ = Bar::<i32> { .. };
   ```

When lints check attributes such as `#[allow(lint_name)]` are placed on a
`RecordField`, it also applies to `def` if it exists.

#### Initialization expressions

`Path { fields, .. }` is `const` since the defaulted fields are initialized

> from constants.

Reviewer 14: This RFC doesn't mention const promotion anywhere.  That's been on our mind a lot recently.  Perhaps it'd be worth discussing that here.

cc @RalfJung

Reviewer 9: The only question I can think of here is whether `&Path { fields, .. }` can be promoted (assuming all expressions in `fields` are promotable). I think the answer can be yes --that is consistent with `&Path { fields }`, and the main criterion is that the expression never fails to evaluate, which is still given. (This assumes that we get a compiler error when using `Path { field, .. }` and one of the constants in the default values fails to evaluate.)

## `#[derive(Default)]`

When generating an implementation of `Default` for a `struct` named `$s` on
which `#[derive(Default)]` has been attached, the compiler will omit all fields
which have default values provided in the `struct`. The the associated function
`default` shall then be defined as (where `$f_i` denotes the `i`-th field of
`$s`):

```rust
fn default() -> Self {
    $s { $f_i: Default::default(), .. }
}
```

> # Drawbacks

Reviewer 9: In this section it is a bit unclear where each downsides ends and the next starts. Please add more explicit structure, e.g. with an enumeration or by starting each now downside with a separate header.

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

The usual drawback of increasing the complexity of the language applies.
However, the degree to which complexity is increased is not substantial.

In particular, the syntax `Foo { .. }` mirrors the identical and already
existing pattern syntax. This makes the addition of `Foo { .. }` at worst
low-cost and potentially cost-free.

It is true that there are cases where `Foo { ..Default::default() }` will be

> allowed where `Foo { .. }` won't be, and vice-versa.

Reviewer 9: This should come with examples -- such cases do not seem to have been discussed above.

it to run the process in reverse.

In some places, Rust could do a better job than it currently does of adhering to
this principle. In this particular case, the pattern syntax `Foo { a, b: c, .. }`
has no counterpart in the expression syntax. This RFC rectifies this by
permitting `Foo { a, b: c, .. }` as an expression syntax; this is identical
to the expression syntax and thus consistency has been gained.

However, it is not merely sufficient to use the same syntax for expressions;
the semantics also have to be similar in kind for things to work out well.
This RFC argues that this is the case because in both contexts, `..` indicates
something partially ignorable is going on: "I am *destructuring*/*constructing*
this struct, and by the way there are some more fields I don't care about
*and let's* drop those* / *and let's fill in with default values*".
In a way, the use of `_` to mean both a catch-all pattern and type / value
placeholder is similar to `..`; in the case of `_` both cases indicate something
unimportant going on. For patterns, `_` matches everything and doesn't give
access to the value; for types, the placeholder is just an unbounded inference

> variable.

Reviewer 9: I think this paragraph is incorrect, in the sense that it makes a claim that just does not hold: the claim that the RFC preserves the expression/pattern duality. The RFC introduces a case where expressions and patterns are *not* dual of each other: `Foo { .. }` as an expression denotes a single particular value, while as a pattern it denotes all `Foo` values. This is correctly listed as a downside, and yet this paragraph here tries to somehow argue for the opposite and claims that they are dual for each other.

  to give a high degree of control over space and time as well as predictable
  performance characteristics.

+ Keeping default values limited to `const` expressions ensures that if
  the following situation develops:

  ```rust
  // Crate A:
  pub struct Foo {
      bar: u8 = const_expr,
  }

  // Crate B:
  const fn baz() -> Foo {
      Foo { .. }
  }
  ```

  then crate A cannot suddenly, and unawares, cause a semver breakage
  for crate B by replacing `const_expr` with `non_const_expr` since
  the compiler would reject such a change (see lemmas 1-2).
  Thus, enforcing constness gives a helping hand in respecting semantic version.

  Note that if Rust would ever gain a mechanism to state that a
  function will not diverge, e.g.:

  ```rust
  nopanic fn foo() -> u8 { 42 } // The weaker variant; more easily attainable.
  total fn bar() -> u8 { 24 } // No divergence, period.
  ```

  then the same semver problem would manifest itself for those types of
  functions. However, Rust does not have any such enforcement mechanism
  right now and if it did, it is generally harder to ensure that a function
  is total than it is to ensure that it is deterministic; thus, while

>   it is regrettable, this is an acceptable trade-off.

Reviewer 9: Yeah I don't think there's anything new or complicated going on here wrt consts; we already have the same thing for enum discriminant values. These default values should follow the same rules.

> If determinism is not enforced [...]

What you need is that a given type (for generic types, a given instance of the type) has a consistent value across a compliation. This is true (albeit with some strange behavior around pointer equality), and enforced, and you can rely on the existing mechanisms for that. The result can however vary across compiler versions, or (theoretically) even across evaluating the same term multiple times as the default value for different fields. So it's not really "deterministic". But that's fine.

+ Finally, note that `const fn`s, when coupled with planned future extensions,
  can become quite expressive. For example, it is already planned that `loop`s,

>   `match`es, `let` statements, and `panic!(..)`s will be allowed.

Author: Fixed

  Another feasible extension in the future is allocation.

  Therefore, constant expressions should be enough to satisfy most expressive
  needs.

## Instead of `Foo { ..Default::default() }`

As an alternative to the proposed design is either explicitly writing out
`..Default::default()` or extending the language such that `Foo { .. }` becomes
sugar for `Foo { ..Default::default() }`. While the latter idea does not satisfy

> any of the [motivation] set out, the former does to a small extent.

Reviewer 18: I think they must be reversed indeed

In particular, `Foo { .. }` as sugar slightly improves ergonomics.
However, it has some notable problems:

+ Because it desugars to `Foo { ..Default::default() }`, it cannot be required
  that the expression is a constant one. This carries all the problems noted in

>   the previous section on why default field values should be a `const` context.

Reviewer 9: It could desugar to `Foo { .. const { Default::default() } }` instead.

... but that may run into the lack of const trait impl support. (Not sure if it does since the type is not generic here.)

+ There is no way of implementing a `Default` implementation that has mandatory
  fields for users to specify during value construction.

+ It provides zero improvements to the ergonomics of *specifying* defaults,
  only for using them. Arguably, the most important aspect of this RFC is
  not the syntax `Foo { .. }` but rather the ability to provide default values
  for field.

+ By extension, the improvement to documentation clarity is lost.

+ The trait `Default` must now become a `#[lang_item]`. This is a sign of
  increasing the overall magic in the system; meanwhile, this proposal makes

>   the default values provided usable by other custom derive macros.

Reviewer 9: Instead we're adding a new primitive expression syntax -- that also increases overall magic. In fact it increases overall magic *more* than a lang item, since a lang item at least still follow the already-known rules of existing items.

So IMO this is a bad argument, and should be removed from the list. Focus on the uncontroversial points. The point of an RFC is not to be a sales document that presents a proposal as the best thing since sliced bread, it is to fairly weigh the technical pros and cons.

Author: I just tried to accurately incorporate all of the arguments that I've encountered when discussing this feature. I'm ok with removing this, but would prefer to include it as it *has* been discussed and wouldn't want language historians to have to dig too much to determine whether it was not discussed or discussed and disregarded.

Reviewer 18: I'd reduce the bullet to "this proposal makes the default values provided usable by other custom derive macros."

(Arguments that are based on the "overall magic" metric are sometimes worthwhile, but when it is questionable whether the overall magic is rising or falling, then its better to just stop using that metric entirely.)

Thus in conclusion, while desugaring `..` to `Default::default()` has lower cost,
it also provides significantly less value to the point of not being worth it.

## `..` is useful as a marker

One possible change to the current design is to permit filling in defaults
by simply writing `Foo {}`; in other words, `..` is simply dropped from the
expression.

Among the benefits are:

+ To enhance ergonomics of initialization further.

+ To introduce less syntax.

+ To be more in line with how other languages treat default values.

Among the drawbacks are:

+ The syntax `Foo { .. }` is no longer introduced to complement the identical
  pattern syntax. As aforementioned, destruction (and pattern matching)
  generally attempts to follow construction in Rust. Because of that,
  introducing `Foo { .. }` is essentially cost-free in terms of the complexity

>   budget. It is arguably even cost-negative.

Reviewer 9: Yet another point where the RFC makes the (IMO incorrect) claim that the syntax preserves pattern/expression duality.

> + By writing `Foo { .. }`, you have there is explicit indication that default
>   values are being used; this enhances local reasoning further.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
+ By writing `Foo { .. }`, there is explicit indication that default
  values are being used; this enhances local reasoning further.
```

This RFC requires the `..` to get defaulted fields because it wants to continue
to allow the workflow of intentionally *not* including `..` in the struct
literal expression so that when a user adds a field they get compilation errors
on every use -- just like is currently possible in patterns by not including
`..` in the struct pattern.

## Named function arguments with default values

A frequently requested feature is named function arguments. Today, the way to
design around the lack of these in the language are:

+ Builder pattern
+ Defining a `struct` "bag-object" where optional fields are set, making users
  call functions in the following way:
  `foo(mandatory, Optionals { bar: 42, ..Default::default() })`

> + Provide multiple methods: `fn foo(mandatory)` *and* `fn foo_with_bar(mandatory, bar)`

Reviewer 9: I expected this section would draw a connection to the RFC, but it just ends here and leaves that as an exercise to the reader. I guess the point is that the second item in the list can now be written more concisely?

    SecondVariant(bool, u8), // See future possibilities.
    ThirdVariant { x: i32, y: Vec<u8> = vec![1] }
}

Enum::FirstVariant;
Enum::SecondVariant(true, 0);
Enum::ThirdVariant { x: 42 };
```

Relative to `#[derive(new)]`, the main benefits are:

+ No wrapping code in strings, as noted in previous sections.
+ The defaults used can be mixed and matches; it works to request all defaults
  or just some of them.

The constructor functions `new_first_variant(..)` are not provided for you.
However, it should be possible to tweak `#[derive(new)]` to interact with
this RFC so that constructor functions are regained if so desired.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

## `#[non_exhaustive]`
1. What is the right interaction wrt. `#[non_exhaustive]`?

   In particular, if given the following definition:

   ```rust
   #[non_exhaustive]
   pub struct Config {
       pub height: u32,
       pub width: u32,
   }
   ```

   it could be possible to construct a `Config` like so, if the construction of
   types without default field values is allowed (to support semver changes):

   ```rust
   let config = Config { width: 640, height: 480, .. };
   ```

>    then adding a field to `Config` can only happen iff that field

Reviewer 4: I distinctly remember someone taking issue with "iff" being used rather than writing it out.

foot-gun: if an API author relies on the privacy of a defaulted field to make a
type unconstructable outside of its defining crate, then this change would cause
the API to no longer be correct, needing the addition of a non-defaulted private
field to keep its prior behavior. If we were to make this change, we could lint
about the situation when all default values are private, which would be silenced
by adding another non-defaulted private field.

Another alternative would be to allow this new behavior in an opt in manner,
such as an attribute or item modifier:

```rust
pub mod foo {
    #[allow_private_defaults(gamma)]
    pub struct Alpha {
        beta: u8 = 42,
        gamma: bool = true,
    }
}
```

```rust
pub mod foo {
    struct Alpha {
        pub(default) beta: u8 = 42,
        pub(default) gamma: bool = true,
    }
}
```

Additionally, the interaction between this privacy behavior and
`#[non_exhaustive]` is fraught and requires additional discussion.

## "Empty" types and types without default field values

Under this RFC, the following code isn't specified one way or the other:

```rust
pub struct Foo;

let _ = Foo { .. }; // should be denied
```

> I propose we disallow this at least initially. `..` can then *only* be used

Author: It might be that we want to leave this question open based on the experimentation we get from the nightly feature.

allow people to write APIs that "feel" like named function arguments when
calling them, although not when defining them.

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = 1080,
    width: u32 = 1920,
}
fn open_window(config: Config) {
    // logic...
}

open_window(_ { width: 800, .. });
```

## Accessing default values from the type

If one were to conceptualize default field values in the following way:

```rust
struct Config {
    height: u32 = Self::HEIGHT,
    width: u32 = Self::WIDTH,
}

impl Config {
    const HEIGHT: u32 = 1080,
    const WIDTH: u32 = 1920,
}
```

It would follow that one should be able to access the value of these defaults
*without* constructing `Config`, by writing `Config::HEIGHT`. I do not believe
this should be done or advanced, but there's nothing in this RFC that precludes
*some* mechanism to access these values in the future. With the RFC as written,
these values can be accessed by instantiating `Config { .. }.height`, as long
as `height` is visible in the current scope.

Note that the *opposite* is supported, writing that code will compile, so any
API author that wants to make these `const` values on the type can (only

> restriction is that `Self` isn't accepted in current `const` contexts):

Author: Oh! This is a *very* recent change, right? Because it *does* work on my draft impl after my last rebase, but 3/4 weeks ago it didn't.

1. The expression `def` must be a constant expression.

2. The expression `def` must coerce to the type `ty`.

3. Generic parameters of the current items are accessible
```rust
struct Bar<const A: usize> {
    field: usize = A,
}
```

4. Default const expressions are *not* evaluated at definition time, only

>    during instantiation. This means that the following will not fail to compile:

Author: I think that we can conceivably mir evaluate the `const` expression and differentiate between "couldn't be evaluated because of missing context" and "evaluated to failure", and lint in the later case. I'd be in favor of such a lint.

>    during instantiation. This means that the following will not fail to compile:

Author: Mentioned the lint

soundness, is preserved.

If a user wishes to keep other modules from constructing a `Foo` with
`Foo { .. }` they can simply add, or keep, one private field without a default

> or add `#[non_exhaustive]`, as mising these two features is not allowed under

Author: I'll change the doc to only propose the minimal version: we don't change the privacy behavior and leave it as a potential future change, gated on defining that interaction.

   omit `#[non_exhaustive]` from their type and instead add a private
   defaulted field that has a ZST.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

## `#[non_exhaustive]` interactions

This RFC doesn't allow mixing default field values and `#[non_exhaustive]`
because of the interaction with the allowance to build struct literals
that have private fields:

```rust
#[non_exhaustive]
pub struct Foo {
    bar: i32 = 42,
}

// another crate
let _ = Foo { .. }; // Currently forbidden, but would be allowed by this RFC without the attribute
```

There are several options:

 - Allow `#[non_exhaustive]` but deny the hability to build a struct literal
   when there are non-accessible fields with defaults
 - Disallow both `#[non_exhaustive]` and building struct literals with private
   fields in order to resolve the interaction some-time in the future, as

>    *enabling* either hability is a backwards compatible change that strictly

Author: I've addressed this in the new future possibilities privacy section. I've changed the RFC to conform to the current privacy rules as if you had a base, called out the possibility of changing that in the future, as well as the necessary lints that we'd need if we wanted to make the change safely after stabilization.

        gamma: bool = true,
    }
}

mod bar {
    fn baz() {
        let x = Alpha { .. };
    }
}
```

Despite `foo::bar` being in a different module than `foo::Alpha` and despite
`beta` and `gamma` being private to `foo::bar`, a Rust compiler could accept
the above snippet. It would be legal because when `Alpha { .. }` expands to
`Alpha { beta: 42, gamma: true }`, the fields `beta` and `gamma` can be
considered in the context of `foo::Alpha`'s *definition site* rather than
`bar::baz`'s definition site.

By permitting the above snippet, you are able to construct a default value
for a type more ergonomically with `Foo { .. }`. Since it isn't possible for
functions in `beta` to access `field`'s value, the value `42` or any other
remains at all times private to `alpha`. Therefore, privacy, and by extension
soundness, is preserved.

This used to be the behavior the Functional Record Update syntax had *before*
[RFC-0736], where we previously allowed for the construction of a value with
private fields with values from a base expression.

If a user wishes to keep other modules from constructing a `Foo` with
`Foo { .. }` they can simply add, or keep, one private field without a default

> or add `#[non_exhaustive]`, as mising these two features is not allowed under

Author: "mixing"
